README.md, before:

# AI Debate Generator

An automated debate video generation system that creates realistic debate videos using AI-powered text generation, text-to-speech, and lip-sync animation. The system generates arguments for both sides of a debate topic, converts them to speech, and creates animated videos with synchronized lip movements.

## 🎯 Features

### Core Features
- **AI-Powered Debate Generation**: Generate compelling arguments for both sides of any debate topic
- **Professional Text-to-Speech**: 
  - **ElevenLabs Integration**: Ultra-realistic human voices with natural intonation and emotion
  - **gTTS Fallback**: Free alternative if no ElevenLabs API key provided
  - Different voices for each debater (male/female professional voices)
- **Enhanced Lip-Sync Animation**: 
  - SadTalker with improved facial expressions and head movements
  - More natural gestures and micro-expressions
  - Professional-grade face enhancement (GFPGAN)
- **Podcast-Style Video Production**:
  - Speakers positioned on professional podcast background
  - Alternating left/right positions for visual variety
  - Customizable backgrounds (or automatic gradient)
  - High-quality 1080p output
- **Microservices Architecture**: Modular Docker-based architecture for scalability and maintainability
- **Web Interface**: Simple web UI to input debate topics and generate videos
- **Flexible Rounds**: Support for multiple debate rounds (1-3 rounds)

## 🏗️ Architecture

The system consists of three main services plus a remote component:

1. **Orchestrator Service** (Port 8000)
   - Main entry point and coordination service
   - Web UI for user interaction
   - Handles the complete pipeline workflow
   - Manages video assembly and output using MoviePy

2. **Text Generation Service** (Port 8001)
   - Generates debate arguments using LM Studio or fallback templates
   - Supports both pro and con positions
   - Integrates with local LLM models via LM Studio API

3. **Text-to-Speech Service** (Port 8002)
   - Converts text to speech using ElevenLabs or gTTS fallback
   - Supports different voices for each debater
   - Outputs WAV files optimized for lip-sync

4. **SadTalker (Google Colab)**
   - Runs on Google Colab with A100 GPU runtime
   - Generates realistic lip-sync animations
   - Exposed via ngrok tunnel

## 📋 Prerequisites

### Local Setup
- Docker and Docker Compose
- Python 3.8+ (for local testing)
- **ElevenLabs API Key** (optional, for realistic voices - get from [elevenlabs.io](https://elevenlabs.io/))
- LM Studio (optional, for local LLM text generation)
- 8GB+ RAM recommended

### Google Colab Setup
- Google account with Colab access
- Colab Pro/Pro+ recommended for A100 GPU access
- ngrok account for tunneling

## 🚀 Installation & Setup

### 1. Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone <repository-url>
cd AI-Debate_Generator
```

### 2. Setup Local Services

Create required directories:
```bash
mkdir -p output assets
```

Add debate avatar images to the `assets/` folder:
- `person1.jpg` - Image for first debater
- `person2.jpg` - Image for second debater
- `background.jpg` - Optional background image (auto-generated if not provided)

### 2.5. Configure API Keys (Optional but Recommended)

**For Realistic Voices with ElevenLabs:**

1. Get your ElevenLabs API key from [elevenlabs.io](https://elevenlabs.io/)
2. Copy `.env.example` to `.env`:
   ```bash
   cp .env.example .env
   ```
3. Edit `.env` and add your API key:
   ```
   ELEVENLABS_API_KEY=your_actual_api_key_here
   ```

**Note**: If you don't provide an ElevenLabs API key, the system will automatically use gTTS (free but less realistic). ElevenLabs provides incredibly lifelike voices that make debates sound much more professional.

### 3. Start Docker Services

Build and start all services:
```bash
    docker-compose up --build
```

This will start:
- Text Generation Service on http://localhost:8001
- TTS Service on http://localhost:8002
- Orchestrator Service on http://localhost:8000

### 4. Setup SadTalker on Google Colab (Enhanced)

**Important**: SadTalker must run on Google Colab with A100 GPU runtime for optimal performance.

1. Open `SadTalker_Colab.ipynb` in Google Colab
2. Select Runtime → Change runtime type → A100 GPU
3. Run all cells in the notebook to:
   - Install Python 3.8 and dependencies
   - Clone and setup SadTalker repository
   - Download required models (including GFPGAN for face enhancement)
   - Start Flask API service
   - Expose via ngrok tunnel

4. Copy the ngrok URL (e.g., `https://xxxx-xx-xx.ngrok.io`)

**Tip**: The Colab notebook includes optimized settings for enhanced facial expressions and natural head movements.

### 5. Configure LM Studio (Optional)

For better text generation quality:

1. Download and install [LM Studio](https://lmstudio.ai/)
2. Load a model (recommended: OpenAI GPT-4 or similar)
3. Start the local server on port 1234
4. The system will automatically use LM Studio if available, otherwise fallback to template responses

## 🎬 Usage

### Web Interface

1. Open your browser and navigate to http://localhost:8000
2. Fill in the form:
   - **Debate Topic**: Enter any debate topic (e.g., "AI will replace most human jobs within 20 years")
   - **Number of Rounds**: Select 1-3 rounds
   - **Colab API URL**: Paste the ngrok URL from your Colab notebook
3. Click "Generate Debate"
4. Wait for processing (may take several minutes)
5. Download the generated video

### API Usage

Generate a debate programmatically:

```bash
    curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/generate \
      -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
      -d '{
        "topic": "AI will improve healthcare outcomes",
        "rounds": 2,
        "colab_url": "https://your-ngrok-url.ngrok.io"
      }'
```

### Testing Individual Services

Test the pipeline components:

```bash
    python test_pipeline.py
```

## 📁 Project Structure

```
AI-Debate_Generator/
├── docker-compose.yml          # Docker orchestration config
├── README.md                   # This file
├── QUICK_START.md             # Quick setup guide
├── AGENTS.md                  # Repository guidelines
├── SadTalker_Colab.ipynb      # Colab notebook for lip-sync
├── test_pipeline.py           # Testing script
├── .env.example               # Environment variables template
├── assets/                    # Input images (create this directory)
│   ├── person1.jpg           # Debater 1 avatar
│   ├── person2.jpg           # Debater 2 avatar
│   └── background.jpg        # Background image (optional)
├── output/                    # Generated videos (created automatically)
├── orchestrator/             # Main coordination service
│   ├── Dockerfile
│   ├── main.py
│   └── requirements.txt
├── text-generation/          # Text generation service
│   ├── Dockerfile
│   ├── text_generator.py
│   └── requirements.txt
└── tts/                      # Text-to-speech service
    ├── Dockerfile
    ├── tts_service.py
    └── requirements.txt
```

## 🔧 Configuration

### Environment Variables

You can customize the services using environment variables in `docker-compose.yml`:

```yaml
environment:
  - PYTHONUNBUFFERED=1
  - LM_STUDIO_URL=http://host.docker.internal:1234
```

### Voice Configuration

**ElevenLabs Voices** (if API key is configured):
- Person 1: Adam - Deep, authoritative male voice
- Person 2: Bella - Professional, confident female voice

To change voices, edit `tts/tts_service.py`:

```python
ELEVENLABS_VOICES = {
    'person1': {
        'voice_id': 'pNInz6obpgDQGcFmaJgB',  # Adam - Deep, authoritative male voice
        'settings': VoiceSettings(
            stability=0.5,
            similarity_boost=0.75,
            style=0.3,
            use_speaker_boost=True
        )
    },
    'person2': {
        'voice_id': 'EXAVITQu4vr4xnSDxMaL',  # Bella - Professional, confident female voice
        'settings': VoiceSettings(
            stability=0.5,
            similarity_boost=0.75,
            style=0.3,
            use_speaker_boost=True
        )
    }
}
```

**Note**: The current implementation uses ElevenLabs v0.2.27 API, which generates audio using the `eleven_multilingual_v2` model.

Browse all available ElevenLabs voices at [elevenlabs.io/voice-library](https://elevenlabs.io/voice-library)

**gTTS Voices** (fallback):
```python
GTTS_VOICES = {
    'person1': {'lang': 'en', 'tld': 'com', 'slow': False},
    'person2': {'lang': 'en', 'tld': 'co.uk', 'slow': False}
}
```

## 🎉 What's New in This Version

### Enhanced Realism Features

1. **ElevenLabs TTS Integration**
   - Professional, human-like voices with natural emotion
   - Separate male (Adam) and female (Bella) voices for debaters
   - Automatic fallback to gTTS if no API key

2. **Professional Video Compositing**
   - Clean, professional video layout
   - Speakers positioned for optimal presentation
   - Custom or auto-generated backgrounds
   - 1080p HD output quality

3. **Enhanced SadTalker Configuration**
   - More natural head movements and gestures
   - Improved facial expressions (30% more expressive)
   - Face enhancement for professional quality
   - Better lip-sync accuracy

4. **Production Quality Improvements**
   - Higher video bitrate (5000k)
   - 25fps for smooth animation
   - Better audio format (16kHz optimized for lip-sync)

## 🐛 Troubleshooting

### Services Not Starting
- Check if ports 8000, 8001, 8002 are available
- Run `docker-compose logs` to see error messages
- Ensure Docker has sufficient memory allocation (8GB+)

### LM Studio Connection Issues
- Verify LM Studio is running on port 1234
- Check firewall settings
- The system will use fallback templates if LM Studio is unavailable

### Colab Connection Issues
- Ensure ngrok tunnel is active in Colab
- Check if Colab runtime is still active (reconnect if needed)
- Verify A100 GPU is allocated in Colab settings

### Video Generation Fails
- Check that avatar images exist in `assets/` folder
- Ensure images are in supported formats (JPG, PNG)
- Verify sufficient disk space in `output/` directory

### Audio Quality Issues
- TTS generates 16kHz mono WAV files for optimal lip-sync
- FFmpeg is used for audio format conversion
- Check TTS service logs for conversion errors

## 📦 Dependencies

### Core Services
- **Flask 2.3.3**: Web framework for microservices
- **Docker**: Containerization platform
- **MoviePy 1.0.3**: Video editing and assembly
- **ElevenLabs 0.2.27**: Premium text-to-speech API
- **gTTS 2.4.0**: Google Text-to-Speech (fallback)
- **Requests 2.31.0**: HTTP client library
- **Pillow 10.0.1**: Image processing
- **NumPy 1.24.3**: Numerical computations

### SadTalker (Colab)
- **PyTorch**: Deep learning framework
- **SadTalker**: Lip-sync animation model
- **FFmpeg**: Video/audio processing
- **pyngrok**: Tunneling service
- **GFPGAN**: Face enhancement

## 🚀 Performance Tips

1. **Use Colab Pro/Pro+**: A100 GPU significantly speeds up video generation
2. **Local LLM**: LM Studio provides better debate quality than fallbacks
3. **Image Quality**: Higher resolution avatars (1024x1024) produce better results
4. **Shorter Debates**: 1-2 rounds process faster than 3 rounds
5. **Keep Colab Active**: Colab may disconnect after inactivity

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Areas for improvement:
- Additional TTS voice options
- More sophisticated debate logic
- Video editing features (transitions, backgrounds)
- Support for more languages
- Real-time progress tracking

## 📄 License

This project is provided as-is for educational and research purposes.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- [SadTalker](https://github.com/OpenTalker/SadTalker) - Lip-sync animation model
- [LM Studio](https://lmstudio.ai/) - Local LLM runtime
- [gTTS](https://github.com/pndurette/gTTS) - Text-to-speech library
- [MoviePy](https://zulko.github.io/moviepy/) - Video editing library

**Note**: This system requires significant computational resources. The SadTalker component MUST run on Google Colab with A100 GPU runtime for acceptable performance. Local GPU execution is possible but requires NVIDIA GPU with 16GB+ VRAM and proper CUDA setup.

Commit message:

Refactor service timeouts; improve error handling and cleanup in video processing

README.md, after:

# AI Debate Generator

An automated debate video generation system that creates realistic debate videos using AI-powered text generation, text-to-speech, and lip-sync animation. The system generates arguments for both sides of a debate topic, converts them to speech, and creates animated videos with synchronized lip movements.

## 🎯 Features

### Core Features
- **AI-Powered Debate Generation**: Generate compelling arguments for both sides of any debate topic
- **Professional Text-to-Speech**: 
  - **ElevenLabs Integration**: Ultra-realistic human voices with natural intonation and emotion
  - **gTTS Fallback**: Free alternative if no ElevenLabs API key provided
  - Different voices for each debater (male/female professional voices)
- **Enhanced Lip-Sync Animation**: 
  - SadTalker with improved facial expressions and head movements
  - More natural gestures and micro-expressions
  - Professional-grade face enhancement (GFPGAN)
  - Automatic FAL upscaling plus Wav2Lip finishing for sharper faces and tighter lip sync
- **Podcast-Style Video Production**:
  - Speakers positioned on professional podcast background
  - Alternating left/right positions for visual variety
  - Customizable backgrounds (or automatic gradient)
  - High-quality 1080p output
- **Microservices Architecture**: Modular Docker-based architecture for scalability and maintainability
- **Web Interface**: Simple web UI to input debate topics and generate videos
- **Flexible Rounds**: Support for multiple debate rounds (1-3 rounds)

## 🏗️ Architecture

The system consists of three main services plus a remote component:

1. **Orchestrator Service** (Port 8000)
   - Main entry point and coordination service
   - Web UI for user interaction
   - Handles the complete pipeline workflow
   - Manages video assembly and output using MoviePy

2. **Text Generation Service** (Port 8001)
   - Generates debate arguments using LM Studio or fallback templates
   - Supports both pro and con positions
   - Integrates with local LLM models via LM Studio API

3. **Text-to-Speech Service** (Port 8002)
   - Converts text to speech using ElevenLabs or gTTS fallback
   - Supports different voices for each debater
   - Outputs WAV files optimized for lip-sync

4. **SadTalker (Google Colab)**
   - Runs on Google Colab with A100 GPU runtime
   - Generates realistic lip-sync animations
   - Exposed via ngrok tunnel

## 📋 Prerequisites

### Local Setup
- Docker and Docker Compose
- Python 3.8+ (for local testing)
- **ElevenLabs API Key** (optional, for realistic voices - get from [elevenlabs.io](https://elevenlabs.io/))
- LM Studio (optional, for local LLM text generation)
- 8GB+ RAM recommended

### Google Colab Setup
- Google account with Colab access
- Colab Pro/Pro+ recommended for A100 GPU access
- ngrok account for tunneling

## 🚀 Installation & Setup

### 1. Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone <repository-url>
cd AI-Debate_Generator
```

### 2. Setup Local Services

Create required directories:
```bash
mkdir -p output assets
```

Add debate avatar images to the `assets/` folder:
- `person1.jpg` - Image for first debater
- `person2.jpg` - Image for second debater
- `background.jpg` - Optional background image (auto-generated if not provided)

### 2.5. Configure API Keys (Optional but Recommended)

**For Realistic Voices with ElevenLabs:**

1. Get your ElevenLabs API key from [elevenlabs.io](https://elevenlabs.io/)
2. Copy `.env.example` to `.env`:
   ```bash
   cp .env.example .env
   ```
3. Edit `.env` and add your API key:
   ```
   ELEVENLABS_API_KEY=your_actual_api_key_here
   ```

**Note**: If you don't provide an ElevenLabs API key, the system will automatically use gTTS (free but less realistic). ElevenLabs provides incredibly lifelike voices that make debates sound much more professional.

### 3. Start Docker Services

Build and start all services:
```bash
    docker-compose up --build
```

This will start:
- Text Generation Service on http://localhost:8001
- TTS Service on http://localhost:8002
- Orchestrator Service on http://localhost:8000

### 4. Setup SadTalker on Google Colab (Enhanced)

**Important**: SadTalker must run on Google Colab with A100 GPU runtime for optimal performance.

1. Open `SadTalker_Colab.ipynb` in Google Colab
2. Select Runtime → Change runtime type → A100 GPU
3. Run all cells in the notebook to:
   - Install Python 3.8 and dependencies
   - Clone and setup SadTalker repository
   - Download required models (including GFPGAN for face enhancement)
   - Start Flask API service
   - Expose via ngrok tunnel

4. Copy the ngrok URL (e.g., `https://xxxx-xx-xx.ngrok.io`)

Once SadTalker produces a base animation, the notebook automatically upscales it with the FAL model and performs a Wav2Lip polishing pass before returning the final clip. Keep the Colab runtime active until both enhancement stages finish.

**Tip**: The Colab notebook includes optimized settings for enhanced facial expressions and natural head movements.

### 5. Configure LM Studio (Optional)

For better text generation quality:

1. Download and install [LM Studio](https://lmstudio.ai/)
2. Load a model (recommended: OpenAI GPT-4 or similar)
3. Start the local server on port 1234
4. The system will automatically use LM Studio if available, otherwise fallback to template responses

## 🎬 Usage

### Web Interface

1. Open your browser and navigate to http://localhost:8000
2. Fill in the form:
   - **Debate Topic**: Enter any debate topic (e.g., "AI will replace most human jobs within 20 years")
   - **Number of Rounds**: Select 1-3 rounds
   - **Colab API URL**: Paste the ngrok URL from your Colab notebook
3. Click "Generate Debate"
4. Wait for processing (may take several minutes)
5. Download the generated video

### API Usage

Generate a debate programmatically:

```bash
    curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/generate \
      -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
      -d '{
        "topic": "AI will improve healthcare outcomes",
        "rounds": 2,
        "colab_url": "https://your-ngrok-url.ngrok.io"
      }'
```

### Testing Individual Services

Test the pipeline components:

```bash
    python test_pipeline.py
```

Add `--colab-url https://your-ngrok-url.ngrok.io` to exercise the full debate flow once SadTalker is online. The script reports individual service health (text generation, TTS, orchestrator) before attempting the end-to-end run, so it is the fastest way to validate changes.

## 📁 Project Structure

```
AI-Debate_Generator/
├── docker-compose.yml          # Docker orchestration config
├── README.md                   # This file
├── QUICK_START.md             # Quick setup guide
├── AGENTS.md                  # Repository guidelines
├── SadTalker_Colab.ipynb      # Colab notebook for lip-sync
├── test_pipeline.py           # Testing script
├── .env.example               # Environment variables template
├── assets/                    # Input images (create this directory)
│   ├── person1.jpg           # Debater 1 avatar
│   ├── person2.jpg           # Debater 2 avatar
│   └── background.jpg        # Background image (optional)
├── output/                    # Generated videos (created automatically)
├── orchestrator/             # Main coordination service
│   ├── Dockerfile
│   ├── main.py
│   └── requirements.txt
├── text-generation/          # Text generation service
│   ├── Dockerfile
│   ├── text_generator.py
│   └── requirements.txt
└── tts/                      # Text-to-speech service
    ├── Dockerfile
    ├── tts_service.py
    └── requirements.txt
```

## 🔧 Configuration

### Environment Variables

You can customize the services using environment variables in `docker-compose.yml`:

```yaml
environment:
  - PYTHONUNBUFFERED=1
  - LM_STUDIO_URL=http://host.docker.internal:1234
```

### Voice Configuration

**ElevenLabs Voices** (if API key is configured):
- Person 1: Adam - Deep, authoritative male voice
- Person 2: Bella - Professional, confident female voice

To change voices, edit `tts/tts_service.py`:

```python
ELEVENLABS_VOICES = {
    'person1': {
        'voice_id': 'pNInz6obpgDQGcFmaJgB',  # Adam - Deep, authoritative male voice
        'settings': VoiceSettings(
            stability=0.5,
            similarity_boost=0.75,
            style=0.3,
            use_speaker_boost=True
        )
    },
    'person2': {
        'voice_id': 'EXAVITQu4vr4xnSDxMaL',  # Bella - Professional, confident female voice
        'settings': VoiceSettings(
            stability=0.5,
            similarity_boost=0.75,
            style=0.3,
            use_speaker_boost=True
        )
    }
}
```

**Note**: The current implementation uses ElevenLabs v0.2.27 API, which generates audio using the `eleven_multilingual_v2` model.

Browse all available ElevenLabs voices at [elevenlabs.io/voice-library](https://elevenlabs.io/voice-library)

**gTTS Voices** (fallback):
```python
GTTS_VOICES = {
    'person1': {'lang': 'en', 'tld': 'com', 'slow': False},
    'person2': {'lang': 'en', 'tld': 'co.uk', 'slow': False}
}
```

## 🎉 What's New in This Version

### Enhanced Realism Features

1. **ElevenLabs TTS Integration**
   - Professional, human-like voices with natural emotion
   - Separate male (Adam) and female (Bella) voices for debaters
   - Automatic fallback to gTTS if no API key

2. **Professional Video Compositing**
   - Clean, professional video layout
   - Speakers positioned for optimal presentation
   - Custom or auto-generated backgrounds
   - 1080p HD output quality

3. **Enhanced SadTalker Configuration**
   - More natural head movements and gestures
   - Improved facial expressions (30% more expressive)
   - Face enhancement for professional quality
   - Better lip-sync accuracy

4. **Production Quality Improvements**
   - Higher video bitrate (5000k)
   - 25fps for smooth animation
   - Better audio format (16kHz optimized for lip-sync)

## 🐛 Troubleshooting

### Services Not Starting
- Check if ports 8000, 8001, 8002 are available
- Run `docker-compose logs` to see error messages
- Ensure Docker has sufficient memory allocation (8GB+)

### LM Studio Connection Issues
- Verify LM Studio is running on port 1234
- Check firewall settings
- The system will use fallback templates if LM Studio is unavailable

### Colab Connection Issues
- Ensure ngrok tunnel is active in Colab
- Check if Colab runtime is still active (reconnect if needed)
- Verify A100 GPU is allocated in Colab settings

### Video Generation Fails
- Check that avatar images exist in `assets/` folder
- Ensure images are in supported formats (JPG, PNG)
- Verify sufficient disk space in `output/` directory

### Audio Quality Issues
- TTS generates 16kHz mono WAV files for optimal lip-sync
- FFmpeg is used for audio format conversion
- Check TTS service logs for conversion errors

## 📦 Dependencies

### Core Services
- **Flask 2.3.3**: Web framework for microservices
- **Docker**: Containerization platform
- **MoviePy 1.0.3**: Video editing and assembly
- **ElevenLabs 0.2.27**: Premium text-to-speech API
- **gTTS 2.4.0**: Google Text-to-Speech (fallback)
- **Requests 2.31.0**: HTTP client library
- **Pillow 10.0.1**: Image processing
- **NumPy 1.24.3**: Numerical computations

### SadTalker (Colab)
- **PyTorch**: Deep learning framework
- **SadTalker**: Lip-sync animation model
- **FFmpeg**: Video/audio processing
- **pyngrok**: Tunneling service
- **GFPGAN**: Face enhancement
- **FAL Upscaling Model**: Post-process super-resolution for SadTalker clips
- **Wav2Lip**: Final lip-sync refinement after upscaling

## 🚀 Performance Tips

1. **Use Colab Pro/Pro+**: A100 GPU significantly speeds up video generation
2. **Local LLM**: LM Studio provides better debate quality than fallbacks
3. **Image Quality**: Higher resolution avatars (1024x1024) produce better results
4. **Shorter Debates**: 1-2 rounds process faster than 3 rounds
5. **Keep Colab Active**: Colab may disconnect after inactivity

## 🤝 Contributing

Review `AGENTS.md` for the concise contributor guide covering service layout, local commands, coding style, testing expectations, and commit/PR conventions. Highlights:
- Use `python test_pipeline.py [--colab-url ...]` to demonstrate the services you touched.
- Follow the existing imperative commit style (“Fixes deployed”) and include scope, env var notes, and artifacts in your PR description.
- Keep secrets (ElevenLabs keys, ngrok tokens) in `.env` only and never commit personal avatar assets.

Areas for improvement:
- Additional TTS voice options
- More sophisticated debate logic
- Video editing features (transitions, backgrounds)
- Support for more languages
- Real-time progress tracking

## 📄 License

This project is provided as-is for educational and research purposes.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- [SadTalker](https://github.com/OpenTalker/SadTalker) - Lip-sync animation model
- [LM Studio](https://lmstudio.ai/) - Local LLM runtime
- [gTTS](https://github.com/pndurette/gTTS) - Text-to-speech library
- [MoviePy](https://zulko.github.io/moviepy/) - Video editing library

**Note**: This system requires significant computational resources. The SadTalker component MUST run on Google Colab with A100 GPU runtime for acceptable performance. Local GPU execution is possible but requires NVIDIA GPU with 16GB+ VRAM and proper CUDA setup.
